In this chapter, we continue
exploring the Linux shell.
We will start with the tools used
to compress and archive files.
Then, we will see ways to search for files,
directories, and patterns in Linux.
This is followed by a hands-on lab.
We will learn about text editors
mainly focusing on the VI editor.
There is also an interactive lab where
you get to play around with the VI editor.
Before we check out the different commands
used for compression and archival,
let's first see how we can check
the size of a file in Linux.
The DU command, which stands for Disk Usage,
is a popular command to inspect
the size of the file.
DU with the option -SK shows the size of
a file or a directory in kilobytes.
A better version of this command, DU-SH prints
the size in a human-readable format.
In this case, it prints that
the size of the file is 98 MB.
We can also use the long list LS-L
to print the size of the file
by including the -H option.
Let us now look at a widely
used utility called tar.
Tar is used to group multiple files
or directories into a single file.
Hence, it is especially useful
for archiving data.
Tar is an abbreviation for Tape Archive.
Files created with tar are
often called tarballs.
This command has a lot of
options and features
and we will cover the basic usage
in this section.
The tar command followed by -C
is used to create an archive.
The -F is used to specify the name
of the tar file to be created.
This is followed by the files or
directories to be archived.
The -TF option followed by the tar file name,
is used to see the contents of the tarball.
The -XF flag is used to extract
the contents from the tarball.
Finally, we can also use the -Z command
to compress the tarball to reduce its size.
Compression is the technique used
to reduce the size
consumed by a file or a data set.
For example, reducing the size of a file
or directory on the Linux file system,
there are commands which are
specifically used for compression.
Let us now look at three of the popular ones,
bzip2, gzip, and xz.
The space of the compressed file created
by these three commands
depends on a few factors such as
the type of data being compressed.
The other factors that affect the size
are the compression algorithm
used by these commands
and the compression level used.
In each of the examples shown here,
the compression command
adds a file extension to
the file after the operation,
namely .bz2, .gz, and .xz.
The compressed files can be
uncompressed using the commands,
bunzip2, gunzip, and unxz.
However, it is important to know
that a compressed file
need not be uncompressed every time.
Tools such as zcat, bzcat and xzcat
allow the compressed file to
be read without uncompressing them.